#2.7. PIDs and Euclidean Domains.

Rings were invented in order to generalize mathematical domains which
are parralel to the properties of integers and polynomials, since
there exist many mathematical structures which share such properties.
Two major properites of interest include the \textbf{fundamental
theorem of arithmetic} and **factorization** via Euclid's
algorithm. These concepts generalize to rings, specifically to
Principal Ideal Domains, which we will demonstrate in this section. 

First we begin with defintions. 


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be a commutative ring, and suppose $a, b \in R$ are
nonzero. Then 

*  [1.] We say $a$ **divides** $b$ if $b = ac$ for
some $c \in R$. This is denoted as $a\mid b$.


*  [2.] Let $a$ not be a unit. Then $a$ is **irreducible** if $a = bc$
implies $b$ or $c$ is a unit. 


*  [3.] If $a$ is not a unit, then $a$ is **prime** if
$a | bc$ implies $a|b$ or $a | c$. 



</span>

As a consquence of these definitions, we have the following
proposition. 

<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain and suppose $a, b \in R$ are
nonzero. Then 

* [1.] If $\left< a \right>$ is the principal ideal
generated by $a$, then $a \mid b$ if and only if $\left< b
\right> \subset \left< a \right>$. 



* [2.] The element $a$ is a prime element of $R$ if and
only if $\left< a \right>$ is a prime ideal.



* [3.] If $a \mid b$ then $au \mid bv$ for any units $u,v
\in R$ 



* [4.] If $a \mid b$ and $a$ is not a unit then $b$ is not
a unit. 



* [5.] If $p$ is prime and $p \mid a_1a_2\cdots a_n$ then
$p \mid a_i$ for some $i \in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$.



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">

* [1.] ($\implies$) Suppose $a \mid b$. Then $b = ac$ for some $c \in
R$. Now observe that 

\[
\left< b \right> = \{rb \mid r \in R\} = \{r(ac) \mid r \in R\} = \left<a\right>c.
\]

Since $\left< a \right>c \subset \left< a \right>$, we have
that $\left< b \right> \subset \left< a \right>$, as desired.

($\impliedby$) Now suppose that $\left< b \right> \subset
\left< a \right>$. Then $b \in \left< a \right>$, so that $b =
ac$ for some $c \in R$. Hence, $a \mid b$, which proves the
result. 



* [2.] This is just the definition of an
element being prime in $R$. 



* [3.] Suppose $a \mid b$ and let $u, v$ be units. Since $b
= ac$ for some $c\in R$, we see that $bu = acv = avc$.
Therefore $bu \mid av$. (Since $u, v$ were units, they are not
zero divisors, so they did not change the value of the
equation.)



* [4.] Suppose $a$ is not a unit and $a \mid b$ for some $b
\in R$. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that $b$ is a
unit. Then $b = ac$ for some $c \in R$, and furthermore there
exists a $d \in R$ such that $br = 1$. 

Therefore, $bd = acd \implies 1 = acd$. Hence $a$ is a unit
since $a(bd) = (bd)a= 1$. But this is a contradiction since we
said $a$ was not a unit, which completes the proof. 



* [5.] Let $p$ be a prime element and suppose $p \mid
a_1a_2 \cdots a_n$ for elements $a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n \in R$. 
Then $a_1a_2\cdots a_n = pb$ for some $b \in R$. Hence we see
that $a_1a_2\cdots a_n \in Rp$. Since $p$ is prime, $Rp$ is a
prime ideal and hence one element $a_i$ where $i \in \{1, 2,
\dots, a_n\}$ must be in $P$. In other words, $p \mid a_i$ for
some $i \in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$, as desired. 



</span>

The above propsition generalizes rules that we hold to be familiar
in $\ZZ$. For example, we know the units of $\ZZ$ are $\{1, -1\}$,
and it is obvious to us that if $a \mid b$ for some integers $a,
b$ then $-1\cdot a \mid -1\cdot b$ and $1 \cdot a \mid 1 \cdot b$.
We also know that if $p$ is prime integer and $p \mid a_1a_2\cdots
a_n$ for some integers $a_1, a_2 \dots, a_n$ then $p \mid a_i$ for
some $i \in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$. The proposition just tells us
that our intuition on $\ZZ$ does in fact generalize to integral
domains, and what we've seen in $\ZZ$ is just a tiny snap shot of
algebra at work.


<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain. If $p \in R$ is prime then $p$
is also irreducible.
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
Let $p \in R$ be prime and suppose $p = qm$ for some $q, m \in
R$. Then by definition we know that $p \mid q$ or $p \mid m$.
Without loss of generality suppose $p \mid q$. Then $q = pc$
for some $c \in R$. Then we have that 

\[
p = qm \implies p = pcm \implies 1 = cm
\]

where we used the cancellation law, valid on integral domains.
Then $m$ is a unit, and hence by definition this implies that
$p$ is irreducible. 
</span>

\textcolor{Red}{Keep in mind that the converse of the above statement
is not true. It will, however, turn out to be true for PIDs.}

We now see that greatest common divisors can be generalized to
integral domains. 


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain and let $A \subset R$ be
nontrivial. Then we define 
</span>


Say $(R, +, \cdot)$ is an integral domain. That is, a commutative
rwith $1 \ne 0$ having no zero divisors. We say it is a Euclidean
Domain if 

* [1.] We have a map $N: R \to mathbb{Z}_{\ge 0}$ with
$N(0)= 0$.


* [2.] Given $a, b \in R$, we can find $q, r \in R$ with $a
= bq + r$ and either  $r = 0$  or $N(r) < N(b)$. 





<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Every ideal in a Euclidean Domain is principal. That is, 

\[
\text{(Euclidean Domain)} \subseteq \text{(Principal Ideal Domains)} \subseteq \text{(Integral Domain)}   
\]

</span>
**Question:** Are there PIDs that are not Euclidean Domains?

\subsection*{Unique Factorization Domain}

<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Say $(R, +, \cdot)$ is an integral domain. Pick $r \in R$ that
is neither zero nor a unit, i.e., $r \not\in
R^{\times}\cup\{0\}$. 

We say that $R$ is **irreducible** if when $r=ab$ either
$a \in R^{\times}$ or $b \in R^{\times}$. Otherwise, we say
that r is **reducible**.
</span>

**Example.** Say $R = \ZZ$. Then 

\begin{align*}
r &= 5 \text{ is irreducible.}\\
r &= 6 = 2 \cdot 3 \text{ is irreducible.}\\
\end{align*}



<span style="display:block" class="definition">
We say $R$ is a **Unique Factorization Domain** (UFD) if
the following holds for all $r \in  R^{\times} \cup \{0\}$:

* [1.] $r = p_1p_2\cdots p_m$ is  a finite product of
irreducibles $p_i \in R$.


* [2.] If $r = q_1q_2\cdots q_m$ is another
factorization into irreducibles, then $n = m$ and $q_i=q_i
\cdot p_i$ for some $u_i \in R^{\times}$. 



</span>
Again, let $R = \ZZ$ and observe that  $r = 6 = 2 \cdot 3 =
(-2)\cdot(-3)$. Really, we see that $2 = (-1)\cdot 2$ and $3 =
(-1)\cdot 3$. 


<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Say $R$ is a UFD. Given $r \not\in R^{\times}
\cup\{0\}$, the following are equivalent:

* [1.] If $I = (r)$ is a nonzero prime ideal of $R$.


* [2.] $r$ is irreducible.  



</span>
Remark: We avoid saying "$r$ is prime", we say "$I = (r)$ is
prime".


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
\begin{description}
\item[$\bm{i \implies ii}$] Assume $I = (r)$ is a prime
Write $r = a \cdot b$. We want to show either $a \in
R^{\times}$ and $b \in R^{\times}$. 

We have $a \cdot b = r \in I$, so by definition either $a
\in I$ or $b \in I$. Either  $a = v \cdot r$ where $b = u
\cdot r$ for some $u, v \in R$. 

Hence either $r = a \cdot b = (v \cdot r)\cdot b$ or  $r =
(v \cdot a) \cdot r$. Since $R$ is an integral domain, the
cancellation law holds. Hence either

\begin{align*}
r = 0 \quad \text{or} \quad v \cdot b = 1 \quad \text{if} \quad a \in I\\ 
r = 0 \quad \text{or} \quad v \cdot a = 1 \quad \text{if} \quad b \in I  
\end{align*}

Since $r \not\in R^{\times}\cup\{0\}$, either $v \cdot b =
1$ or $u \cdot a = 1$. Hence either $b \in R^{\times}$ or
$a \in R^{\times}$ is a unit. 

\item[$\bm{ii  \implies i}$.] Assume $r \in R$. We'll
show that $I$ is a **proper** ideal. Since $r \not\in
R^{\times}$, we know that $I  \ne R$. 

Now we show that $I$ is prime. Say $a, b \in R$ satisfying
$a \cdot b \in I$. We must show that either $a \in I$ or $b \in
I$. Since $a \cdot b \in I$, we can write  $a \cdot b = r
\cdot c$ for some $c \in  R$. 
\\
\\
**Case \#1.** Either $a,  b = 0$. Then either $a, b
\in I$.
\\
\\
**Case \#2.**  Either  $a, b \in R^{\times}$. Without
loss of generality, say  $a \cdot u = 1$. Then $b = u
\cdot r \cdot  c \in I$. 
\\
\\
**Case \#3.** $a, b \not\in R^{\times}\cup\{0\}$.
Since $R$ is a UFD, factor $a$ and $b$. 

\begin{align*}
a = p_1p_2\cdots p_n\\
b = q_1q_2\cdots q_m.
\end{align*}

Hence $a \cdot b = p_1\cdots p_nq_1 \cdots q_m$. But $r$
is an irreducible that divides $a \cdot b = c \cdot r$.
Thus either $q_i = u \cdot r$ or $p_j = v \cdot r$ for
some $i, j$. But then either 

\begin{align*}
a = (v\cdot r) p_2 \cdots p_n \in I = (r)\\
b = (v \cdot r) q_2 \cdots q_m \in I = (r)
\end{align*}

if for example $i, j= 1$. 

\end{description}
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Say $(R, +, \cdot)$ is an integral domain. We say $R$ is a
**principal ideal domain** (PID) if every ideal $I = (r)$
is principal.
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proposition">

* [1.] If $R$ is a Euclidean Domain, then $R$ is a PID.


* [2.] If $R$ is a PID, then $R$ is a UFD. 



</span>

Here's a diagram of what we have so far. 

\[
\text{(Euclidean Domains)} \subseteq \text{(Principal Ideal Domains)} \subseteq \text{(UFDs)} \subseteq \text{(Integral Domains)}
\]


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
We showed (1) before. Now we show (2). Assume $R$ is a PID.
We'll show that every $r \in R$ that is nonzero has unique
factorization. 

\[
r = u \cdot p_1p_2 \cdots p_n
\]

where $u \in R^{\times}$ and $p_i$ are irreducibles. We will
in two parts: (i) existence (of at least one factorzation) and
(ii) uniqueness (of at most one factorization).

\begin{description}
\item[Existence.] Consider

\[
S = \{I = (r) \mid r \in R-\{0\} \text{ does not have a factorization}\}.   
\]

We want to show that $S = \varnothing$. Thus assume
otherwise. Pick some $I_1 = (r_1)$ in $S$. 
Then $r_1 \not\in R^{\times}\cup\{0\}$ and $r_1$ is not
irreducible. This means that $r_1$ is reducible, so write 

\[
r_1 = r_2 \cdot r_2' \quad r_2,r_2' \in R^{\times}\cup\{0\}.
\]

Consider $I_2 = (r_2)$ and $I_2' = (r_2')$. If both $r_2,
r_2'$ have factorizations into irreducibles, then so would
$r_1 = r_2\cdot r_2'$. Thus without loss of generality, $r_2$
does not have a factorization into irreducibles. Thus the
ideal $I_2 \in S$. Observe $I_1 \subsetneqq I_2$. We then have
a chain of proper ideals:

\[
I_1 \subsetneqq I_2 \subsetneqq \cdots \subsetneqq I_n \subsetneqq \cdots \subsetneqq R.
\]

Let $\displaystyle I = \bigcup_{n \ge 1} I_n = (r_0)$ as the maximal ideal.
ask: is $I \in S$? If  $I \in S$, then we see that $I$ is not
maximal. If $I \not\in S$, then $r_0$ can be written as a
product of irreducibles. 

\item[Uniqueness.] We show uniqueness. Consider a proof by
induction via the following statement:

\begin{align*}
P(n) = \text{"If } r \in R - \{0\} \text{ has some factorization }\\ 
r=u\cdot p_1\cdots p_n \text{ into }  n
\text{ irreducibles, then such a factorization is unique."}
\end{align*}

We will show $P(n)$ is true for $n=0,1,2$. 

* [Base Case.] If $r \ne 0$ has a factorization into
$n = 0$ irreducibles, then $r = u$ is a unit. Say it
has a second factorization 

\[
r = u \cdot q_1 \cdots q_n \text{  for } m>0.
\]

Then 

\[
1 = (u^{-1}\cdot v \cdot q_1 \cdots q_m)\cdot q_m
\]

So $q_m \in R^{\times}$ is a unit. This is a contradiction


* [Induction.] 
Suppose that $P(n_0)$ is true for some $n_0 \ge 0$.
Then we'll show that $P(n_0 + 1)$ is true. Consider $r
\ne 0$ that is the product of $n$ irreducibles: 

\begin{align*}
r & = u \cdot p_1 \cdots p_n\\
& = (u \cdot p_1 \cdots p_{n_0}) \cdot p_n
\end{align*}

Say we have a second factorization:

\[
r = v \cdot q_1 \cdots q_m.
\]

We then have the following facts:\\
$P = (p_n)$ is a prime ideal of $R$. (Recall $I = (r)$
is prime if and only if $r$ is irreducible.)\\
$\overline{Q_i} = q_i \cdot P$ is a coset in
$\overline{R} = R/P$.  Not all $\overline{q_i} \ne
\overline{0}$. Why? Because 

\[
\overline{u} \cdot \overline{q_1} \cdots \overline{q_m}\overline{p_m} = \overline{u\cdot  q_1 \cdots q_m} \cdot \overline{p_m} = 0.
\]

Since $\overline{R}$ is an integral domain, without
of generality,  suppose $\overline{q_m} =
\overline{0}$. Hence $q_m = q_m \cdot p_n$. Now
consider 

\[
(u \cdot p_1 \cdots p_{n_0}) \cdot p_n
= 
r
= 
(u_m\cdot v \cdot  q_1 \cdots q_{m-1})\cdot p_n.
\]

Since we're in an integral domain, we can use the
cancellation law. Hence we have that 

\[
u\cdot p_1 \cdots p_{n_0} = (u_m \cdot v)\cdot q_1 \cdots q_{m-1}.  
\]

Now we can invoke the inductive hypothesis. We see
that $m - 1 = n_0$  and $q_i = u_i \cdot p_i$ for some
unit $u_i \in R^{\times}$. However, this is equivalent
to saying that $m = n$. and as we showed $q_m = u_m
\cdot p_n$, we have that the factorizations are the
same. Hence $P(n)$ is true for all positive integers. 



\end{description}
</span>

**Primes, irreducibles and Maximal Ideals.**\\

<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Say $(R, +, \cdot)$ is a PID. Then the following are
equivalent for  $r \in R$ with $r \not\in
R^{\times}\cup\{0\}$:

* [i.] $r$ is irreducible.


* [ii] $I = (r)$ is a prime ideal.


* [iii.] $I=(r)$ is a maximal ideal.   



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
First observe that $i \iff ii$ since they are true in a UFD,
and we know that a PID is a UFD. Hence we just need to show
that $ii \iff iii$. 

We show that $(ii \iff iii)$. By way of contradiction, sy $I =
(r)$ is a prime that is not maximal. Then we can find an ideal
$M = (a)$ such that $I \subsetneqq M \subsetneqq R$. This
means that $a | r$. That is, one can find $a, b \in R$ such
that $r = a\cdot b$. 

Since $I$ is prime and $a \cdot b \in  I$, either $a \in I$ or
$b \in I$. If $a \in I$, then $M = (a) \subset I$, which would
imply that $M = I$. Thus we have a contradiction. 

Thus we need that $b \in I$. Since $b \in I = (r)$, write $b =
u \cdot r$. Then $r = a \cdot b = (u \cdot a) \cdot r$. Since
$r \ne 0$, we find $u \cdot a = 1$. This means that $a \in
R^\times$ so $M = (a) = R$. But $M \subsetneqq R$, so again we
find a contradiction.

Thus we see that $I$ must be a maximal ideal. The other
direction, that every maximal ideal is a prime ideal, is trivial.
</span>

\section*{Dedekind-Hasse Norms.}
**Motivating questions.**

* [1.] Are there examples of PIDs that are not Euclidean Domains?


* [2.] Are there examples of PIDs that are not $\ZZ$?  




Say $(R, +, \cdot)$ is an integral domain. A **norm** is a
map $\mathbb{N} : R \to \mathbb{Z}_{\ge 0}$. such that
$\mathbb{N}(0) = 0$.

On the other hand, a **Dedekind-Hasse** Norm is a norm
$\mathbb{N}$ satisfying 
\begin{description}
\item[DH1.] ${N}(0) = 0$
\item[DH2.] $N(a) > 0$ for all $a > 0$
\item[DH3.] For all nonzero $a, b \in R$, either 

* [1.] $b$ divides $a$, i.e., $a = q \cdot b$ or 


* [2.] there exits $s, t \in R$ such that 

\[
x = s \cdot a -  t \cdot b \in  (a , b) 
\]

satisfies $0 < N(x) < N(b)$.



\end{description}
Remark: If in (DH3) we can **always** choose $s = 1$, then we
say that $R$ is a Euclidean Domain.

**Examples.**\\
Let $R = \mathbb{Z}$. This a Euclidean Domain. The statement (DH3)
is the Euclidean algorithm for $N(a) = |a|$.
\\
\\
Let $R$ be any integral domain. Then $S = R[x]$ is also an
integral domain. We define a norm on $S$ be saying $N(g(x)) =
\text{deg}(g)$ if $g \ne 0$. If $g(x) \equiv 0$ is the zero
polynomial, then $\deg(g) = -\infty$. So define $N(0) = 0$. This
is not Dedekind-Hasse. As an example, consider $R = \ZZ$. Then let
$I =(2, x)$ in $S$. This is not a principal ideal.

Now consider $F$ a field. Let $S' = F[x]$ which is a PID. Define
$N(g(x= 2^{\deg(g)}$. And $N(0) = 2^{-\infty} = 0$.



<script src="../../mathjax_helper.js"></script>