#2.5. Principal, Maximal and Prime Ideals.
We'll now move more deeper into ring theory. The results
prior were already things we've been familiar with, since they
were true for groups. It is here that we'll move onto new,
deeper concepts regarding the ideal of a ring. 

Let $X \subset R$. Then we can talk about the \textbf{subring
generated by} $X$ as the smallest subring containing $X$, or
equivalently, the intersection of all the subrings containing
$X$. More explicitly, we can define it to be the set of all
finite sums of elements of $X$. 

Similarly, we can define the **ideal generated by**
$X$, which again is the smallest ideal containing $X$ or
equivthalently the intersection of all ideals contianing $X$. 
More explicitly, if $R$ is a ring with identity, then the ideal
generated by $X$ is 

\[
\left< X \right> = \Big\{\sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_is_i \mid r_i, s_i \in R, x_i \in X \text{ and } n \in \mathbb{N}\Big\}
\]

while if $R$ is commutative (and again, has an identity) this becomes 

\[
\left< X \right>= \Big\{\sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_i \mid r_i \in R, x_i \in X \text{ and } n \in \mathbb{N}\Big\}.
\]

Note: this is not valid for rings without identity. 

\textcolor{MidnightBlue}{Why are these formulas correct? We'll
show this for the more general case for when $R$ may not be
commutative. Specifically, we'll show that these formulas are
not only ideals, but that they are the smallest ideals
containing $X$ as we have claimed. 
\\
\indent If $r \in R$ then 

\[
r\left( \sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_is_i \right) = \sum_{i=1}^{n}(rr_i)x_is_i \in \left< X \right> 
\]

since $rr_i \in R$ for each $i \in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$.
Similarly, 

\[
\left( \sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_is_i \right)r = \sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_i(s_ir) \in \left< X \right> 
\]

since again, $s_ir \in R$ for each $i \in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$.
Thus this is an ideal. Now let $X'$ be an ideal which contains
$X$. Pick an arbitrary element $\displaystyle \sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_is_i \in
\left< X \right>$. Observe that since $X'$ is an ideal
containing $X$, we know that $r_ix_is_i \in X'$ for each $i
\in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$, and hence the sum itself,
$\sum_{i=1}^{n}r_ix_is_i$, must be in $X'$. 
\\
\indent Thus for any ideal $X'$ containing $X$, we see that $\left< X
\right> \subset X'$. Hence, $\left< X \right>$ is the smallest
ideal containing $X$. The proof is similar, and easier, for
the case of $\left< X \right>$ when $R$ is commutative.
}


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be commutative and $X = \{a\}$, where $a \in R$.
Then the ideal generated by $X$ given by 

\[
\left< X \right> = \{ra \mid r \in R\}
\]

is said to be a **principal ideal generated by $a$**.
Note that since $R$ is commutative, we could have also
written $\left< X \right> = \{ar \mid r \in R\}$.

One may also view a principal ideal generated by $a$ as
the set $Ra$ (or again, equivalently as $aR$).
</span>

What's an example of this? Consider the ring $\ZZ$. Then the
subring $2\ZZ$ is a principle ideal generated by the element
2. That is 

\[
2\ZZ = \{2n \mid n \in \ZZ\}
\]

which is pretty basic fact that we already know. But note that
every ideal $I$ of $\ZZ$ is of this form. 

\textcolor{NavyBlue}{To see this, consider an ideal $I$ of
$\ZZ$ and suppose $i$ is the smallest positive element of $I$.
First observe that there is no $j \in I$ such that $i < j <
2i$. Suppose there was. Then $j = i + k$ for some $0 < k < i$.
Since $I$ is closed, we know that 

\[
j - i = i + k - i = k   
\]

is a member of $I$. But this contradicts our assumption that
$i$ was the smallest positive element of $I$. Therefore, there
is no $j \in I$ such that $i < j < 2i$, so that $I$ is of the
form 

\[
I = \{\dots, -2i, -i, 0, i, 2i, \dots\}.
\]

Hence, $I$ is generated by $i$, a single element, so that $I$
is **principal**.
}
Thus every ideal of $\ZZ$ is principal. Rings who exhibit this
type of behavior get a special name.  


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain. Then $R$ is a
**principal ideal domain (PID)** if every ideal of
$R$ is principal.
</span>
As we just showed, $\ZZ$ is a principal ideal domain.


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be a ring. Then an ideal $M \ne R$ is called
**maximal** if, for any other ideal $I$ such that $M
\subset I \subset R$ we have that $M = I$ or $I = R$. 
</span>

An example of this is the ring $\ZZ$ with the ideal $p\ZZ$
where $p$ is prime. To show this, suppose $I$ is an ideal such

\[
p\ZZ \subset I \subset \ZZ
\]

and further that there exists an $i \in I$ such that $i
\not\in p\ZZ$. 

Since $i$ is not divisible by $p$, we know by Fermat's Little
Theorem that 

\[ 
i^{p-1} = 1 \mbox{ mod }p.
\]

Thus for some $n \in \ZZ$, $pn - i^{p-1} = 1.$ Since $p\ZZ \subset
I$ and $i \in I \implies i^{p-1} \in I$, we see that $pn - i^{p-1} = 1 \in I$. Since $1 \in
I$, we can repeatedly add and subtract $1$ to generated all of
$\ZZ$, and since this must all be contained in $I$, we have that $I = \ZZ$. Thus $p\ZZ$ is maximal.


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $R$ be a ring and $I$ a proper ideal (i.e., $I \ne
R$.) Then there is a maximal ideal of $R$ containing $I$.
Furthermore, if $R$ is a ring with identity, then there
are always maximal ideals.
</span>

How do we know when a given ideal is maximal or not? That is,
how do we know there aren't "bigger" proper ideals which
contain the one we are interested in?

<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with identity. Then an ideal
$M$ of $R$ is maximal if and only if $R/M$ is a field. In
other words, 

\[
M \text{ is maximal } \iff R/M \text{ is a field.}
\]

\vspace{-0.8cm}

</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
($\implies$) Suppose $M$ is a maximal ideal. To show that $R/M$ is a
field, we first realize that it is commutative since $R$
is commutative. Thus we just need to show it is a divison
ring. 

Let $a + M \in R/M$ where $a \not\in M$. Since $aR$ and
$M$ are both ideals, we have that $aR + M$ is an ideal.
Note that $M \subset aR + M$, which implies that $aR +  M
= R$. Therefore, there exists an element $r \in R$ and $m
\in M$ such
that $ar + m = 1$. 

Since $ar = 1 - m$, consider $r + R \in R/M$, and observe
that 

\[
(a + M)(r + M) = ar + M = 1 - m + M = 1 + M
\]

so that $r + M$ is the desired inverse of $a + M$. Since
$a \not\in M$, this shows that $R/M$ is a division ring.
Since it is commutative, it is a field. 

($\impliedby$)
Now suppose that $R/M$ is a field. It is a commutative
division ring, so that by Lemma \ref{divison_ring_thm} we
know that its only ideals are either $0$ or $R/M$. But by
the Fouth Isomorphism Theorem, we know that these ideals of
$R/M$ correspond to $M$ and $R$. Thus there are no other
ideals of $R$ containing $M$ other than $M$ and $R$,
proving that $M$ is maximal. 
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be a commutative ring. Then an ideal $P$ is said
to be **prime** if $P \ne R$ and if $ab \in P$, then
either $a \in P$ or $b \in P$. Furthermore, if there
exists a $p \in R$ such that $Rp = \left< p \right>$ is a
prime ideal, then $p$ is said to be prime.
</span>

\textcolor{NavyBlue}{You may wonder why we would make this definition, since ideals tend to suck in elements of
$R$ (i.e., $ri \in R$ for all $i \in I$, $r \in R$). However,
just because $ab \in I$ does not mean $a \in I$ or $b \in I$. 
Consider for instance the ring $4\ZZ$. Obviously, $4 \in
4\ZZ$, but $2\cdot2 = 4$ and yet $2 \not\in 4\ZZ$.}

Prime ideals have a similar theorem that maximal ideals have. 


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with identity. Then an ideal
$P$ of $R$ is prime if and only if $R/P$ is an integeral
domain. That is, 

\[
P \text{ is prime } \iff R/P \text{ is an integral domain.}
\]

\vspace{-0.8cm}
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
($\implies$) Suppose $P$ is a prime ideal. To show that $R/P$ is an
integral domain, we must show that it has no zero divisor
(as we already know it is commutative). Thus 
let $r + P \in R/P$ where $r \not\in P$.
Suppose for the sake of contradiction that

\[
(r + P)(r' + P) = P   
\]

for some $r' + P \in R/P$ where $r' \not\in P$ (i.e.,
that there are zero divisors). Then this
implies that $rr' \in P$. Since $P$ is prime, we have that
either $r \in P$ for $r' \in P$, which is a contradiction
since our hypothesis was that $r, r' \not\in p$. Therefore
$R/P$ is commutative and has no zero divisors, so it is an
integral domain. 

($\impliedby$) Now suppose that $R/P$ is an integral
domain. Then 

\[
(r + P)(r' + P) \ne P
\]

for any $r$ and $r' \not\in P$. In other words, if $r, r'
\not\in P$ then $rr' \not\in P$. Taking the contrapositive of
this statement, we have equivalently that if $rr' \in P$
then $r$ or $r' \in P$ (notice how that "and" changed to
an "or" upon negation) which proves that $P$ is prime.
</span>

Finally, we can combine all of these theorems into one useful
criterion for primeness. 


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with identity. Let $I$ be an
ideal. If $I$ is maximal then $I$ is prime. In other
words, 

\[
I \text{ is maximal } \implies I \text{ is prime.}
\]

\vspace{-0.8cm}
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
By Theorem 1.\ref{maximal_theorem}, if $I$ is maximal then
$R/I$ is a field. But since $R/M$ is a field, it is an
integral domain. Hence by Theorem 1.\ref{prime_theorem},
we have that $I$ is a prime ideal, which proves the theorem.
</span>

The corollaries of these theorems are immediate. 


<span style="display:block" class="corollary">
Let $R$ and $S$ be commutative rings with identity, and suppose 
$\phi: R \to S$ be a surjective ring homomorphism. Then 

* [1.] If $S$ is a field, then $\ker(\phi)$ is a
maximal ideal of $R$. 


* [2.] If $S$ is an integral domain then
$\ker(\phi)$ is a prime ideal of $R$. 



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">

* [1.] If $\phi$ is surjective, then by the First
Isomorphism Theorem $R/\ker(\phi) = \im(\phi) = S$.
Therefore $R/\ker(\phi)$ is a field, so by Theorem
1.\ref{maximal_theorem} we have that $\ker(\phi)$ is
maximal. 



* [2.] In this case, we again have that
$R/\ker(\phi) = S$, so that $R/\ker(\phi)$ is an
integral domain. Therefore $\ker(\phi)$ is a prime
ideal of $R$ by Theorem 1.\ref{prime_theorem}.



</span>




<script src="../../mathjax_helper.js"></script>