<style>
.md-content {
    max-width: 80em;
}
</style>
#1.4. Cyclic Groups.
Cyclics groups are a special type of group that are easy to
recognize as group structures. In a cyclic group, one can always
pinpoint a single element which can "generate" every other element
of the group. For example, the subgroup of rotations $\{e, r, r^2,
\dots, r^{n-1}\}$ in dihedral groups
is cyclic. In such a subgroup, every element is simply a fininte
power of $r$. We can then think of this subgroup as
being generated by a single element, namely $r$.

It will turn out later that, in every group, there will always be
a subset of its elements such that the subset generates the whole
group. Here, we're starting small, by just considering groups
whose elements can be generated by *one* element.


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
A group $G$ is **cyclic** if there exists an element $g
\in G$ such that 

$$
G = \{g^n \mid n \in \mathbb{N}\}.
$$

</span>

A very trivial example of a cyclic group is the integers under
addition. This is because every element in $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ can
be generated by the number 1 (e.g., 3 = 1 + 1 + 1, -2 $= -1 -1$).
With the definition of cyclic groups at hand, we can introduce
theorems about cyclic groups.


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $G$ be a cyclic group, and suppose $G = \{g^n 
| n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ for some $g \in G$. Then $|G| = |g|$.
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
Suppose $|g| = k$ where $k$ is some positive integer. Then 
since $G = \{g^n | n \in \mathbb{N}\}$, 

$$
G = \{e, g, g^2, \dots, g^{k-1}\}.
$$

Therefore $|G| = k = |g|$. Now if $|g| = \infty$, then 
by the same exact reasoning $|G| = \infty$.
</span>
A consequence of this theorem is that if $|g| = \infty$, then we
know that $g^a \ne g^b$ for any $a, b \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $a
\ne b$. This would imply that $g^{a - b} = 1$, which otherwise 
imply the group $G$ to have finite order; a contradiction if $|g|
= \infty$ since this implies $|G| = \infty$.


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Any two cyclic groups of the same order are isomorphic.
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
Let $G$ and $G'$ be two cyclic groups and suppose $|G| =
|G'|$. Furthermore suppose that $G = \left< g\right>$ and $G'
= \left< g' \right>$. Construct the homomorphism $\phi: G \to
G'$ where 

$$
\phi(g^n) = (g')^n
$$

for any $n \in \mathbb{N}$. Observe that this is surjective, as
the groups are of equal order so for any $(g')^n$ there we can
identify the preimage to be $g^n$. This is also injective,
since if $g_1' = g_2'$ are both elements in $G'$, then $g_1' =
g_2' = (g')^n$ for some $n$ which corresponds to one and only
one element in $G$; namely, $g^n$.
As the homomorphism we constructed is surjective and
injective, we have that $\phi$ is an isomorphism so that the
groups are isomorphic.

Note we could have also utilized Theorem 1.3 here, by constructing
the homomorphism $\psi: G' \to G$ where $\psi((g')^n) = g^n$.

</span>

We'll now move onto a more useful theorem concerning cyclic groups.


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $G$ be a cyclic group. Then every subgroup of $G$ is cyclic.
</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
Let $H$ be a subgroup of $G$.
Let $m$ be the smallest integer such that $g^m \in H$. Suppose
towards a contradiction that $H$ is not cyclic. That is, there
exists an element $h \in H$ such that $h \ne g^{mn}$ for any
$m \in \mathbb{N}$. 

Since $h \in G$, and $G$ is a cyclic group, it must be *some*
integer power of $g$. Since $h \ne g^m$ for any $m \in
\mathbb{N}$, 
we know that
there must exist $q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $h
= g^{qm + r}$ where $0 < r < m$. 

Now since $H$ is a group, $h^{-1} = g^{-(qm + r)} \in H$.
Furthermore, $g^{(q+1)m} \in H$ since $H$ is closed under
products. By the same reasoning,

$$
g^{(q+1)m}g^{-(qm + r)} = g^{m-r}
$$

is in $H$. However, this contradicts our assumption that $m$
is the smallest positive integer such that $g^m \in H$. Thus
by contradiction $H$ must be cyclic. 
</span>
**Remark.**
This proof utilizes the important idea that, if you *know* $G$ is
a group, and $g_1, g_2$ are *any* two elements of $G$, then
the product $g_1g_2 \in G$. Furthermore, if $g_1, g_2, \dots, g_n
\in G$, then $g_1^{n_1}g_2^{n_2}\cdots g_k^{n_k} \in G$ for
literally any powers $n_1, n_2 \dots n_k \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

We used this idea by (1) observing that $g^m \in H$, so that
$g^{(q+1)m} \in H$ for any $q \in \mathbb{Z}$ and (2) reasoning
that $g^{(q+1)m}g^{-(qm + r)} \in H$.

In addition, we'll offer a way to think about subgroups of a
cyclic group $G$:

\begin{gather}
G = \{{\color{blue}e}, g, {\color{blue}g^2}, g^3, {\color{blue}g^4}, g^5, {\color{blue}g^6}, g^7, {\color{blue}g^8}, g^9, g^10, \dots\}\\
\hspace{0.5cm}= \{{\color{red}e}, g, g^2, {\color{red}g^3}, g^4, g^5, {\color{red}g^6}, g^7, g^8, {\color{red}g^9}, g^{10}, \dots\}\\
\hspace{0.5cm}= \{{\color{magenta}e}, g, g^2, g^3, {\color{magenta}g^4}, g^5, g^6, g^7, {\color{magenta}g^8}, g^9, g^{10}, \dots\}
\end{gather}

In the above representations, the color-highlighted powers of $g$
form subgroups of $G$. Thus $\{{\color{blue}e}, {\color{blue}g^2},
{\color{blue}g^4}, {\color{blue}g^6}, \dots\}$, 
$\{{\color{red}e}, {\color{red}g^3},
{\color{red}g^6}, {\color{red}g^9}, \dots \}$ and $\{{\color{magenta}e}, {\color{magenta}g^4},
{\color{magenta}g^8}, \dots\}$ are
all subgroups of $G$. Of course, this process will eventually terminate if
$G$ is finite, but we represent the most general case above with
the $\dots$ terms. In addition, if $G$ is finite one of the
subgroups may turn out to be just the entire group $G$. 

To find the exact subgroups of a cyclic group we can use the
following theorem. 


<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $G$ be a finite cyclic group of order $n$. For every positive
integer $d$ such that $d|n$, there is exactly one subgroup of
order $d$ of $G$. These are all the subgroups of $G$. 
</span> 


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
Let $H$ be a subgroup of $G$ and suppose
$|H| = m \le n$. We'll first show that $n \mid m$ and then
show that for every $d \mid n$, there exists a subgroup of
order $d$.

By the previous theorem, we
know that $H$ must be cyclic. Therefore $H = \{h^n \mid n \in
\mathbb{N}\}$ for some $h \in G$. However, by Theorem 1.4, we
also know that $|H| = |h|$, so that $h^m = e$. Therefore, 

$$
H = \{e, h, h^2, \dots, h^{m-1}\}.
$$
 
However, if $G = \{e, g, g^2, \dots, g^{n-1}\}$ for some $g \in G$, then $h = g^k$ for some
positive integer
$k < n$. Therefore 

$$
H = \{g^{jk} \mid j \in \mathbb{N}\}.
$$

Since $g^k$ generates $H$, we can apply Theorem 1.4 to
conclude that $|g^k| = m$. In order for this to be true, there must
exist some positive integer $j$ such that $g^{jk} = e$.

On one hand, we already know $m$ is the smallest such integer, as
we specified $h^m = (g^k)^m = e$. On the other, we also know
that $|g| = n$; that is, $n$ is the smallest integer such that
$g^n = e$. Therefore, we have that 

$$
n = mk
$$

which proves that $m \mid n$. 

To show that for each $d \mid n$ there exists a subgroup of
order $d$, simply observe that if $G = \{e, g, g^2, \dots ,
g^n\}$ then the set $\{e, g^{n/d}, g^{2n/d}, \dots,
g^{(d-1)n/d}\}$ is a subgroup of order $d$. This completes the
proof.
</span>




<script src="../../mathjax_helper.js"></script>