#3.3. Generating Modules, Torsions, Annihilators.
The concepts we have introduced so far are not new. In fact, this
is the third time you've probably seen all of these concepts.
However, module theory is very deep, and here is where we will
start seeing new concepts. 
\\
\\
**Generating Modules.**\\
Let $M$ be an $R$-module and suppose $S \subset M$ where $S$ is
nonempty.
Denote the
smallest submodule of $M$ containing $S$ as $\left< S \right>$,
and observe that 

\[
\left< S \right> = \bigcap_{\alpha \in \lambda} S_{\alpha}
\]

where $\{S_\alpha\}_{\alpha \in \lambda}$ is a family of
submodules containing $S$.

Note that this is in fact a submodule,
since arbitrary intersections of submodules yield a submodule. 

Now consider the set of all finite linear combinations of elements
of $S$ with coefficients in $R$. That is, 

\[
S' = \Big\{\sum_{i = 1}^{n} a_is_i \mid a_i \in R, s_i \in S \text{ for all } i \in N\Big\}. 
\]

This is of course also an $R$-module. We claim that $\left< S
\right> = S'$.
\begin{description}
\item[\phantom{meow}]$\bf{\left< S \right> \subset S'.}$ To
see this, consider any $s \in \left<S\right>$. Then $s \in
S_{\alpha}$ for all $\alpha \in \lambda$. Furthermore, since
$S \subset S'$ we see that $S'$ is one of the members of the
families of all submodules containing $S$. Therefore we must
have that $s \in S'$, and thus $\displaystyle s = \sum_{i = 1}^{n}a_is_i$
for some $a_i \in R$ and $s_i \in S$. Hence, $\left<S
\right> \subset S'$.

\item[\phantom{meow}]$\bf{S' \subset \left< S \right>}.$
Simply observe that since $\left< S \right>$ contains $S$, and
because $\left< S \right>$ is a submodule,
it must be that $\left< S \right>$ contains all linear combinations of
elements of $S$ with coefficients in $R$. That is,
$\displaystyle \sum_{i = 1}^{n} a_is_i \in \left< S \right>$
for any $a_i \in R, s_i \in S$. 
\end{description}

Thus what we have shown is the following theorem. 

<span style="display:block" class="theorem">
Let $M$ be an $R$-module and suppose $S \subset M$. Then if
$\left< S \right>$ is the smallest submodule of $M$ containing
$S$ then 

\[
\left< S \right> = \bigcap_{\alpha \in \lambda} S_\alpha
\]

where $\{S_\alpha\}_{\alpha \in \lambda}$ is the family of
submodules containing $S$. More explicilty, we have that 

\[
\left< S \right> = \Big\{\sum_{i = 1}^{n} a_is_i \mid a_i \in R, s_i \in S \text{ for all } i \in N\Big\}.
\]

\vspace{-0.7cm}
</span>

The above theorem then leads a very useful definition that we will
work with frequently. 


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $M$ be an $R$-module and $S \subset M$.

* [1.] The $R$-submodule $\left< S \right>$ of $M$ is
called the **submodule of $M$ generated by $S$.**


* [2.] If $M = \left< S \right>$ for some $S \subset M$, then we say that
**$M$ is generated by $S$**. Hence, the elements of
$S$ are referred to as the **generators** of $M$.


* [3.] If $M$ is generated by $S$ and $S$ is finite,
then we say **$M$ is finitely generated by $S$**. In
this case we refer to $|S|$, denoted as $\mu(M)$, as the
**rank** of $M$. Furthermore, if $S = \{x_1, x_2,
\dots, x_n\}$ it is convenient to write $M = \left< x_1,
x_2, \dots, x_n \right>$.



</span>

In the case of a cyclic group $G$, we see that $G$ has rank one
and one generator. Thus we see that this concept is generalized in
module theory if the generating set for some module is of
cardinality one. 

Note we can also union modules together to get another module.

<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $M$ be an $R$-module and $\{S_{\alpha}\}$ a family of
submodules of $R$. Then the \textbf{submodule generated by
$\{N_{\alpha}\}_\{\alpha \in \lambda\}$} is 

\[
\left< \bigcup_{\alpha \in \lambda}S_\alpha\right>
\]

which we often denote as $\displaystyle \sum_{\alpha \in \lambda}S_{\alpha}$.
</span>

Next we move onto the concept of an annihilator, which we define
as follows. 


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $M$ be an $R$-module, and suppose $X \subset M$. Then we
define the set 

\[
\ann(X) = \{a \in R \mid ax = 0 \text{ for all }x \in X\}
\]

to be the **annihilator of $X$**.
</span>
\textcolor{NavyBlue}{Note that $\ann(X) \subset R$ and that
$0 \in \ann(X)$ for any $X \subset M$. If $\ann(X) = \{0\}$, we of
course say that it is **trivial**.}

The annihilator captures
all of the coefficients of $R$ which annihilate every element in
$X$. Thus one can imagine that the size of $\ann(X)$ increases as
the size of
$X \subset M$ increases (of course, if $\ann(X)$ is not trivial for all $X$.)


<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Let $M$ be an $R$-module and let $X \subset M$ be nonempty. Then 

* [1.] $\ann(X)$ is a left ideal of $R$


* [2.] If $N$ is a submodule of $M$, then $\ann(N)$
is an ideal of $R$.


* [3.] If $R$ is commutative and $N$ is a cyclic submodule of $M$ generated by $x \in
N$ then $\ann(N) = \{a \in R \mid ax = 0 \}$.



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">

* [1.] 
Let $X \subset M$. In order for $\ann(X)$ to be a left ideal, it must be a subring of
$R$ which absorbs left multiplication. 
\begin{description}


* [It's a Subring.] We can apply the subring test to
prove this. Recall earlier we said that $0 \in \ann(X)$
for any $X \subset M$, so $\ann$ is nonempty. 

Now let $a, b \in \ann(X)$, so that $ax = bx = 0$ for all
$x \in X$. Then clearly $abx = 0$ and $(a - b)x = ax -bx
= 0$ so that $ab \in \ann(X)$ and $a-b \in \ann(X)$. Thus
it is a subring of $R$.



* [It's an ideal.] For any $r \in R$ and $a \in
\ann(X)$ we have that $rax = r(ax) = 0$. Therefore
$ra\in I$ for all $r \in R$, which proves it is a left
ideal. 
\\
\textcolor{Plum}{Why isn't it also a right ideal? Well,
observe that we would need $arx = 0$ whenever $a \in
\ann(X)$ and $r \in R$. This would require either that
$ar = 0$, which we can't always guarantee, or that $rx
\in X$. But we don't know if $rx \in X$; we could only
guarantee that if $X$ was an $R$-module, which we'll
see in the next proof.
}
\end{description} 



* [2.] Let $N$ be a submodule of $M$. Since we showed
in (1.) that $\ann(X)$ is a left
ideal for any $X \subset M$, we must simply show that
$\ann(N)$ also absorbs right multiplication of $R$ as well in
order to show it is an ideal.

Thus let $r\in R$ and $a \in \ann(N)$. Since $N$ is a
submodule of $N$ we know 
that $rx \in N$. Hence $a(rx) = 0$ as $an = 0$ for all $n
\in N$. Therefore $ar \in \ann(N)$ whenever $r \in R$ and
$a \in \ann(N)$, proving that $\ann(X)$ absorbs right
multiplication and is therefore an ideal.



* [3.] Consider $\ann(N)$ where $N$ is cyclic and
generated by $x$ and let $|N| = k$. Suppose we have an $a \in R$ such that
$ax = 0$. Then we
see that $ax^2 = (ax)x = 0$, $ax^3 = (ax)x^2 = 0$, and
that in general $ax^j = (ax)x^{j-1} = 0$ for any $j \in
\{1, 2, \dots, k\}$. Since every $n \in N$ is of the form
$x^j$ for some $j \in \{1, 2, \dots, k\}$ we have $an = 0$
for all $n \in N$. Hence, 

\[
\ann(X) = \{a \in R \mid an = 0 \text{ for all } n \in N\} = \{a \in R \mid ax = 0\}.
\]

\textcolor{red}{Where does commutativity come into play?}



</span>  
Note that in general we denoted $\ann(x)$ to be $\ann(N)$ where
$N$ is cyclic and generated by $x$. This only really makes sense
if $R$ is commutative.

For an $R$-module $M$ and a family of submodules
$\{N_\alpha\}_{\alpha \in \lambda}$, we have been able to define
the arbitrary intersection and addition of submodules. Next we
define the product of $R$-modules. We now define a product of
$R$-modules. 

If $M$ is an $R$-module and $I$ is an ideal, then we can define 

\[
IM = \Big\{ \sum_{i = 1}^{n}a_im_i \mid a_i \in R, m_i \in M \text{ for } n \in N \Big\}    
\]

which is a submodule of $R$. Thus our main properties of
submodules are intersection, addition, and products with ideals. 


<span style="display:block" class="definition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain and $M$ an $R$-module. Suppose
$x \in M$. Then

* [1.] If $\ann(x) \ne \{0\}$ then we define $x$ to be
**torsion element**. We define the set of torsion
elements of $M$ to be the **torsion submodule** and
denote this as $M_{\tau}$.


* [2.] If $M_\tau = \{0\}$ then we say $M$ is
**torsion free**, while if $M_\tau = M$ we say that
$M$ is **torsion module**.



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain and $M$ an $R$-module. Then 

* [1.] $M_\tau$ is a submodule of $M$. 


* [2.] $M/M_\tau$ is torsion free. 



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proof">

* [1.] We can use the submodule test to show that this
is a submodule of $M$. First, recall that $M_\tau$ is
nonempty as it always contains 0. Let $a, b \in R$ and suppose $m_1,
m_2 \in M_\tau$. Then observe that $(am_1 + bm_2)x = am_1x
+ bm_2x = 0$ since $m_1x = 0$ and $m_2x = 0$. Hence, this
is a submodule.



* [2.] Suppose that $(m + M_\tau)x = M_\tau$ where $m
\in M$ for some $x \in M$. 
Then this implies that $mx \in M_\tau$. Therefore there
exists a $n \in R$ such that $n(mx) = (nm)x = 0$. Since
$R$ is an integral domain, $nm \ne 0$ so that we must have
$x = 0$. Thus the torsion module is trivial.



</span>


<span style="display:block" class="proposition">
Let $R$ be an integral domain and suppose $M = \left< x_1,x_2,
\dots, x_n \right>$ (that is, $M$ is finitely generated). Then 

\[
\ann(M) = \ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2) \cap \dots \cap \ann(x_n).
\]

</span>
Note that $0 \in \ann(x_i)$ for all $i \in \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$.
Hence, the above intersection is never empty. 


<span style="display:block" class="proof">
\begin{description}
\item[\phantom{m}]$\bf{\ann(M) \subset \ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2) \cap \dots \cap \ann(x_n)}$.
Observe that for any $a \in \ann(M)$, we see that $ax = 0$
for all $x \in M$. In particular, $ax_i = 0$ for $i \in
\{1, 2, \dots, n\}$. Hence we see that $a \in \ann(x_i)$
for each $x_i$, so that $a \in \ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2)
\cap \dots \cap \ann(x_n)$.

\item[\phantom{m}]$\bf{\ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2) \cap \dots
\cap \ann(x_n) \subset }\bf{\ann(M)}$. Observe that for $
a \in \ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2) \cap \dots \cap \ann(x_n)$
we see that $ax_i = 0$ for each $i \in \{1, 2, \dots,
n\}$.

By 1.\ref{submodule_intersection_theorem} we know that for
any $m \in M$ we have that $\displaystyle m = \sum_{i =
1}^{n}a_ix_i$ for some $a_i \in R$ and $x_i \in M$. But
note that 

\[
am = a\sum_{i =1}^{n}a_ix_i = \sum_{i =1}^{n}aa_ix_i = \sum_{i =1}^{n}a_i(ax_i) =0
\]

where in the last step we used the commutativity of $R$.
Therefore $a \in \ann(X)$, proving that $\ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2) \cap \dots
\cap \ann(x_n) \subset \ann(M)$.
\end{description}
With both directions of the proof complete, we can conclude
that 
$\ann(M) = \ann(x_1) \cap \ann(x_2) \cap \dots \cap
\ann(x_n)$ as desired.
</span>




<script src="../../mathjax_helper.js"></script>